[Hackernoon build a simple html website with posgres connectivity](https://hackernoon.com/build-a-simple-html-website-with-postgres-database-connectivity) 
# 2026-01-19
I managed to download postgresql, and play around with psql a little bit. I'm asking gemini to help me structure my research spike. 

It gave some suggestions on how to structure my research spike: 

1. How to Structure Your Research Spike
Think of a spike as a "time-boxed" investigation (e.g., "I will spend 4 hours on this"). At the end, you should produce a small document or notes covering:
- The Schema: How will the tables look? (e.g., A users table and a jokes table).
    - I would at least have a users table and a jokes table. The relationship would be many-to-one where a user can be associated with multiple jokes. The same joke can be related to multiple users too (like if a joke is really popular).
- The Relationship: How do you link a joke to a specific user? (Look up "Foreign Keys").
    - [source](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/fscp-designing-relational-databases/modules/fscp-designing-a-database/cheatsheet)
    - Foreign keys reference the primary key of another table. For example in our table we could have the user_id be the foreign key within the joke table that refers to the "id" value within the users table (I think this is right) 
    - To create a foreign key in postgresql, you use the REFERENCES keyword. An example would be the one on codecademy. 
    ```
    CREATE TABLE orders (
  order_number integer, 
  customer_id integer REFERENCES customers(id),); 
  CREATE TABLE customers (
    id integer PRIMARY KEY, name text);

- Datatypes [postgresql documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype.html)
    - UUID Type. UUID stands for universally unique identifiers and can also be known as a guid. The identifier is generated by an algorithm where it's very unlikely the same identifier will be generated by anyone else using the same algorithm. Postgresql supports generating UUIDs, and the data type uuid can be used to store any uuid. A uuid can look like this a0eebc99-9c0b-4ef8-bb6d-6bb9bd380a11
    - Text Type: this stores strings of any length. 
    - Varchar: this is an alias for "character varying" Mostly varchar acts as a "domain" over text. I'm not really sure what the difference between varchar and text is though. 
    - [Review] --> in postgresql, there is not a performance difference between text and varchar, but we'll want to use a text as the datatype so we accidentally cut off a really long joke
# 2026-01-21
- Connecting website to database
--> number one, what is a web framework? Question for later
--> [Review] --> A web framework is something that handles the plumbing of the web, it listens for requests from a browser and sends back data or HTML
[medium article](https://medium.com/@eslmzadpc13/how-to-connect-a-postgres-database-to-express-a-step-by-step-guide-b2fffeb8aeac)
- To connect the database to our express application, we'll need to provide the credentials so our web framework can access the database and make queries. The queries will also be async javascript functions, so maybe [reading / learning more about async is a good idea](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function)
- make sure to use a .env file to store sensitive info for the database. Is this the same as a git-ignore file? 
[Review] --> the .env file is where you keep the secrets, gitignore is just so git doesn't post your secrets ONLINE
- What is connection pooling? 
[Review] --> Connection pooling keeps the "phone lines" to the database open so the app can quickly ask a question to the database without waiting.  

- Handling API Data
    - How can we parse the jokes that come back from icanhazdadjoke API? 
    - From what I'm reading, looks like the JSON format of the API is the "id" and the "joke". In my current system, I only show one joke at a time to the user, so maybe I could have a specific place where I pull the joke out of an array (if I got back multiple jokes), and format it to go into the database?? 
    - Also, the question of should I use the API "id" vs my own UUID or id system is interesting. Maybe I could save both "id" values? An "internal_id" which I assign, and an "external_id" that icanhazdadjoke assigned? Just in case icanhazdadjoke changes their id system in the future. 
    - There's also something in here called GraphQL?? But that doesn't look relevant.

- Questions to Ask Myself
1. If a user tries to save the same joke twice, should I allow it? [unique constraint sql](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-constraints.html#DDL-CONSTRAINTS-UNIQUE-CONSTRAINTS)
    - I think the users should definitely be unique, we don't want two people who might accidentally have the ame account
    - I'm not sure if the jokes need to be unique. Thinking aloud, I believe that the way I set up my database will matter. I'll have a users table and a jokes table. The users will be unique, and the jokes would be unique. Maybe that means I need a linking or a lookup table? Something like user_jokes that has the user_id and the joke_id so I don't duplicate jokes taking up lots of space to associate with a user.
    - Unique also has functionality where I can make the "combination of values in the indicated columns is unique across the whole table" so that means i could go the route where the joke table has a uniqueness by ROW instead of just the joke_id, removing the need for the lookup table. I'd just make sure that the  joke and associated user_id are unique per row. Not sure what is "better" but I'm leaning towards the lookup table as a better choice intuitively. 
    - [Review] --> The linking or lookup table is known as a Junction Table. The advantage of using this is that you only save the "joke" one time and use the user_id and joke_id to return the appropriate joke to the appropriate user
2. store the joke_id or create my own? 
    - touched on this a little bit above, I think it makes sense to store the joke_id and create my own, and use my personal id to link all the tables since the joke_id from the api might change and mess up my whole database
3. Look up env files
    - an .env file is a simple text file used to store configuration settings, environment variables, and other key-value pairs. They typically contain sensitive information such as API keys, db credentials, on configuration settings. 

Next Steps:
- Look into "pg" library for node-postgres. Specifically documentation for pool.query() which is how we'll send the insert statment from our javascript to the database
- Research "ON CONFLICT" clause in postgres which prevents us from saving duplicate jokes in our database
- Research "Mapping Table" approaches when investigating how we're going to save our "external" joke id and our "internal" joke id

The Workflow: What are the steps? (1. Fetch from API  2. Clean data 3. Save to Postgres).
The Tools: Which library will your website use to "talk" to Postgres?

# 2026-01-22
Learning about authentication. I'd like to set up a username and password, so that would be another table for our database 😊
Gemini suggests using [passport.js](https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/authentication/) for the task. When I used fastapi for my other project, I remember this not being too bad, so hopefully this is also easy. 

# 2026-01-24
Today's goal is to learn about passport.js and how to use it to set up my authentication
Passport is used as middleware within a web application to authenticate request
    - what is middleware? https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html
        - Middleware functions are functions that have access to the request object and the response object
Strategies are responsible for authenticating requests. An authentication mechanism defines HOW to encode a credential, such as a password, then specifies the procedure necessary to verify the credential. If the credential is valid, then the request is authenticated. 
To use use a specific "strategy" we'll download the strategy from the npm registry using a package manager (example would be npm install passport-local)
Configure: once you've downloaded the strategy you've gotta configure it. In the documentation they show the process of creating a variable called "LocalStrategy" that requires the strategy 'passport-local' Then within the strategy we get some information from the database. Where we select everything related to a specific username and make sure the username and password exist. In addition it looks like the function compares the hashed passwords to make sure they match. 
Once we've made our logic to verify a user and their password, then we "register" the strategy. We do this by creating a new variable and requiring 'passport' then say passport.use('strategy_name') to register
    - A question is can we use multiple strategies? I would think so. 
Once the strategy is registered, we can use it to authenticate a request as a part of our middlewear! (This means that our middlewear function will be able to access both the request (the username password) and the response (the database response of the question we will ask?) Please make sure this understanding is correct)

Sessions - a webapp needs to be able to identify userss as they browse from page to page, this series of requests and responses associated with the same user is known as a session. To create a metaphor, think of the webapp as an enchanted book. Each time a person turns the page, the enchanted book knows what person is reading which page for that reading session. If another person without the same credentials tries to read "forbidden" book pages, they cannot. 
    A session is established by setting a HTTP cookie in the browser which the browser transmits to the server on every request. This is important because HTTP is stateless protocol, so most of the time the HTTP call and response isn't really interested in if a person is authorized from one request (one page) to another. 
    So to maintain an authorized state, the webapp needs to initialize "session support". Apparently passport serializes and deserializes user information but I'm not really sure what that means, or if that's relevant for me.
        - Being serialized means that we can pull back specific information for a specific user I think?  

Next time: 
https://web.dev/articles/sign-in-form-best-practices